Fallacious Utopia: A Philosopher King In Pakistan?
Is our political environment not conducive to the grooming of philosopher kings? Or is tyranny the only option?

As the country witnessed a rather emotional return of the bastion of the House of Sharif on October 21, 2023, a pressing question remains regarding the future outlook of leaders to come. Are we to remain dependent on the exile and return of leaders for the country to function?

In one of his popular dialogues – the ‘Republic’ – Plato presents the framework of a just society. As loaded as this term may be, one of the key features of this society was the presence of a ‘philosopher king’. An individual who governs his subjects and his own life while pursuing the ultimate truth and thereby discovering that notion of good, which encompasses justice, equity and equality. Plato argues that such a figure would be suited to the role of a leader as his spirit would not be encumbered by greed and lust, which are traits of human beings found in a state of nature (i.E. People left without a state or collective union). Plato’s assumption was that the absence of disingenuous ambition would allow the philosopher to enact policies beneficial for his subjects. Without delving into the merits of Plato’s arguments in this dialogue, the question remains whether such a figure could be allowed to emerge from amongst the 230 million people residing in Pakistan.

It appeared for a moment that former prime minister Imran Khan might represent the stoic ideals encapsulated in Plato’s philosopher. Placed into that coveted throne was a man who preached ideals of morality by rinsing the corridors and halls of parliament. As many of his cultists argue, he had ‘nothing to gain’ from coming to Pakistan and contesting elections to become the leader of this great nation. Before his ardent supporters give out a yelp of excitement over this dignified allusion to the selfless king, it is worth noting that Imran was operating in a vacuum, divorced from practical realities under which he had been anointed as leader by the forces that be. The abrupt divorce between Islamabad and Rawalpindi towards the end of Imran’s premiership signalled his amnesia about how his coronation was arranged. It seemed that pride, vainglory and hastiness trumped over the pursuit of justice. Slogans were thrown around, claims were made, and members of the opposition eliminated; what started as a programme of accountability remained just that – a programme. To what end, no one knows, nor did anyone care. As long as petrol prices remained low, the thieves in their cells, and inflated figures of GDP growth were provided, we stood at the cusp of greatness. The wheel continued to rotate rather than being re-imagined.

One may approach the subject of Nawaz Sharif’s return with similar scepticism due to his turbulent tenures as premier: an inevitable tussle with the not-so-smooth operators leading to his court martial and subsequent dismissal. At Minar-e-Pakistan, we witnessed a somewhat emotional Nawaz Sharif, a father returning to his children after a journey through time. However, Nawaz may not have noticed that the younger of the bunch may no longer be willing to welcome him with open arms as long as their treasured chief remains in Adiala Jail. The subtle difference that is always associated with the love of the people for their leader lies within the fear or generosity of the said leader. As of now, the gems of history have been presented before us; however, the episodes of disqualification and the move to London have left the populace feeling uneasy.

With the ushering of each leader, a different dream was sold to the public. Upon Partition, it was that we were free from the persecution and tyranny of our neighbours; Pakistan then became a treasured ally of the West; we were the last stronghold in Asia against the communist wave; our nation bore the brunt of the war on terror, countless lives were lost and we were told that it was for the greater good; then we cosied up to our Chinese benefactors so that a programme of economic mobilisation was initiated; and now we yearn for true freedom. It appears that we have come full circle now that, once again, freedom is being demanded, but freedom from what or whom. Freedom from our circumstances, freedom from our declining status, or freedom from those who represent our interests. The preceding three demands represent the ambivalence of feelings amongst the interests of people along a polarised spectrum of socio-economic classes.

As rebellious children, we ask rather rudely: what has this 76-year-old state provided us? Broken dreams and broken people. While ambassadors were being driven across the border, our dictators and politicians were concerned with the acquisition of marvels of German and Japanese engineering. As a piece of our country broke away, our president recovered from his stupor in the early hours of the morning. As we were being integrated into the Chinese Belt and Road Initiative, assets in London were being protected by neat corporate layers. Finally, as accountability and justice were being delivered, disputes over the appointment of a military chief translated into a swift ejection from parliament.

Could it be that our political environment has never been conducive to the grooming of philosopher kings or that the divide between the two classes – oligarchs and workers – has enlarged to the extent that the only option that remains is tyranny? Policies have been made as part of knee-jerk reactions to various local and international plights without foreseeing future repercussions. It appears that Pakistan may not be capable of producing philosopher kings. However, one could argue that it simply requires an immediate cessation of prodigal habits to favour the gradual cultivation of empathetic leaders at the very least.

WRITTEN BY:Faateh Nasir
The writer is a recent graduate from the London School of Economic and Political Science and is currently working towards obtaining qualifications as a Solicitor of England and Wales.

The views expressed by the writer and the reader comments do not necassarily reflect the views and policies of the Express Tribune.

The Top 10 Allegories In Fiction, From Plato To Kafka
I used to think that the allegory was a rather straightforward, narrow form: a simple, metaphorical story conceived to deliver a political or moral lesson. But, in fact, it is stretchier and more versatile than that.

Beasts of England by Adam Biles review – Animal Farm for the post-Brexit era

Read more

Allegories, I’ve learned, can be used to persuade or to parody. They can be used to give a lesson, to draw equivalences, and to highlight hypocrisies. They can be used to crystallise the reader’s understanding of a situation, but also to blow smoke in her eyes. And an allegory can be understood as a moral act in itself. George Orwell’s Animal Farm is one such. This slim work of genius doesn’t so much impart a moral, as embody the attempt to live, and write, in line with a set of principles – no matter the opposition.

When I started writing Beasts of England – my sequel to Animal Farm – I was worried I might find the conventions imposed by the allegorical setting restrictive. In the end, I was struck by the space it offers the writer and reader, and the fun that can be had with it.

Below are 10 of my favourite allegories, from classics that defined the form (and our view of the world), to surreal and unsettling parables and contemporary masterpieces.

1. Aesop’s FablesIf we think of foxes as sly, asses as foolish, and tortoises as slow and steady, it’s in large part because of Aesop’s fables. For centuries they have formed part of the ethical education of readers, old and young, the world over. Most of the stories have a very clear moral, which is either spoken by one of the characters, or spelled out in a concluding sentence, depending on the translation, and many have given rise to expressions we use without a passing thought for attribution: “Pride comes before a fall”, “Look before you leap” and “Out of the frying pan, into the fire” all come from Aesop.

2. Plato’s caveFor those of us who grew up before The Matrix, encountering Plato’s allegory of the cave in A-level philosophy, was our very own “red pill” moment. Outlined in The Republic – by Socrates in conversation with Glaucon – we are asked to imagine a group of people imprisoned since childhood in a cave. They have no contact with the outside world and consider the shadows of people and objects they see thrown on to the wall by the light of a fire as reality. The precise meaning of the allegory is still debated two–and–a–half millennia after Plato set it down.

3. Gulliver’s Travels by Jonathan SwiftTo borrow from Groucho Marx, if you don’t like one of the allegories in Gulliver’s Travels, well, Jonathan Swift has others … We all probably remember the diminutive Lilliputians, the giants of Brobdingnag, and perhaps even the intelligent and charismatic horses from the land of the Houyhnhnms. But until I recently reread the book I had completely forgotten about the floating island of Laputa, and Gulliver’s jaunt to Glubbdubdrib where he converses with the ghosts of Homer, Aristotle, Julius Caesar and René Descartes. Rooted in 18th-century politics and culture, the novel manages to transcend its topicality by speaking a timeless truth: that human beings are utterly useless and broadly very stupid.

4. La Grande Beuverie by René DaumalTranslated as A Night of Serious Drinking, although I prefer The Great Booze-Up – this begins in a smoky tavern with a debate about the “disintegrative” power of language. It quickly unravels into a mystical (or perhaps just sozzled) fable that that exposes the absurdities of artists, scientists, politicians and others with broad (yet broadly accurate) strokes of the pen. Visionary and fun, but not for readers who object to being, and remaining, confused.

Read