Bird Beaks Reveal The Changeable Nature Of Evolution
By James Ashworth

First published 25 October 2023

The Natural History Museum’s collections are helping scientists to get a handle on how evolution works.

The digitisation of thousands of bird specimens is being used to try and explain some of the reasons behind our planet’s extraordinary diversity.

Birds fit the bill for answering some of the biggest questions about evolution.

While the general principles behind evolution by natural selection have been known for more than 160 years, the scanning of museum specimens is allowing scientists to dig into some of the finer details.

A new study, using scans of beaks from over 8,700 bird species, is helping to work out how evolution changes at different scales.

Dr Gavin Thomas, a co-author of the paper from the University of Sheffield, says, ‘Bird beaks are an excellent trait to study evolution with as they vary in a consistent way. They have a huge range of shapes that seem to be linked to ecology, such as the food they eat and the way that they forage.’

‘If you take a trait from another group, like mammal skull shape, there’s so much variation that we wouldn’t be able to answer these questions about evolution.’

Dr Natalie Cooper, a Senior Researcher at the Natural History Museum who also co-authored the paper, adds, ‘While we focused on birds, we’re interested in answering big questions about evolution. How exactly does it happen? Why do we have this amazing diversity of life on Earth?’

‘While bird beaks are fascinating in their own right, this research can help to answer much more fundamental questions about evolution.’

The findings of the study were published in the journal Science Advances.

Three hummingbirds wrapped in labels.
Over 8,000 birds from collections in the UK were used as part of the research. Image © The Trustees of the Natural History Museum, London. 

A question of scale
The team are interested in how evolution compares across three different scales: microevolution, macroevolution, and megaevolution.

Microevolution is the form that most people will be familiar with. It describes evolution within a species, where variation between individuals leads to selection for certain traits that are better adapted for a given situation. As these individuals are more likely to survive, their traits are passed on to the next generation and slowly build up in a species.

The other terms are harder to define, but help to show the evolution of different species and groups of species.

‘Whereas microevolution is about evolution within species, macroevolution is about evolution among them, and how species diverge from one another,’ Gavin says. ‘Megaevolution represents the difference between higher taxonomic groups of animals, such as the evolutionary differences between mammals and birds.’

To draw comparisons at such a large scale, scientists need an equally large dataset. The team made use of bird collections housed at the Natural History Museum, Tring and Manchester Museum to 3D scan around 85% of all known bird species.

With help from community scientists, the researchers marked out different features on the bird specimens so that their beaks could be mathematically modelled. This meant that comparisons between different parts of the bird family tree could be more easily made. 

A bee hummingbird in flight.
The bee hummingbird is the smallest known bird, but despite the size difference, its beak has a similar shape to other hummingbirds. Image © Piotr Poznan/Shutterstock.

An innovative approach to evolution
In their comparisons, the team were particularly interested in elaboration and innovation. These terms describe the different routes evolution can take, with bird groups given a score for each.

‘Elaboration is about variation on a theme,’ Natalie says. ‘Rather than doing something completely different, evolution takes traits down similar routes which lead to different outcomes.’

‘Innovation, meanwhile, is where evolution goes in a completely different direction and can create new characteristics that might not be seen in other groups.’

Some of the best examples of these processes in action are found in the 350 species of hummingbirds, which all feed on nectar. This means their beaks have similarities because of the challenges in getting nectar, but are all slightly different depending on the flowers the birds feed on.

‘While there are constraints on how they can feed on nectar, meaning hummingbirds tend to have very thin beaks, you can see the elaboration between different species,’ Gavin says. ‘The sword-billed hummingbird, for instance, has a bill that can be as much as 12 centimetres long, which is almost the length of its entire body.’

‘On the other end of the spectrum, the bee hummingbird has one of the shortest beaks in nature. The general morphology of the beaks is similar in both species, but their lengths are very different.’

A swift in flight over a park with trees.
While they're closely related to hummingbirds, the beaks of swifts are very different to their relatives'. Image © Dilomski/Shutterstock.

Comparing the beaks of hummingbirds to their closest living relatives, the swifts, reveals the impact of innovation. While hummingbirds have long, slender beaks, swifts have wide, short bills to help them catch flying insects. The difference between the beaks of the two groups is a good example of innovation.

‘Hummingbirds and swifts diverged around 50 million years ago, so they have been separated for a long time,’ Gavin says. ‘In that time they’ve evolved in completely different directions into new morphologies and ecologies.’

In general, the team found that at a macroevolutionary scale, elaboration tended to be more important than innovation as species diverged. Innovation tended to be more important at a megaevolutionary scale, with many different routes leading to large shifts between less related groups of birds.

Using the resulting scores, the team now hope to examine how elaboration and innovation are affected by a bird’s environment.

‘We want to see how these scores are linked to ecological and habitat factors,’ Natalie explains.

‘For instance, we’ve looked into island species for a future paper, as these animals are often seen as special. We wanted to see if innovation had a role to play in that and if it might be more common on islands than on the mainland.’

The researchers would also like to examine microevolution more closely, a part of the project which was delayed by COVID-19. This would allow the team to see if evolution at different scales follows similar patterns, giving deeper insights into this fundamental process.


6 Of The Biggest Birds In The World
6 of the biggest birds in the world
Ostriches are social animals that live in flocks.

2. Somali ostrich
The Somali ostrich (Struthio molybdophanes) is native to the Somali Peninsula and the Horn of Africa. It looks similar to the common ostrich but has been considered to be a separate species since 2016. 

6 of the biggest birds in the world
A Somali ostrich in Kenya.

The main difference between the two ostriches is that the Somali ostrich has a blue neck and thighs, for which it is also known as the “blue-necked ostrich”.  

But when it comes to size and weight, they are pretty similar. The Somali ostrich typically weighs from 200 to 290 lbs (90 to 130 kg) and stands 6 to 9 ft (2-3 meters) tall. 

3. Emu 
The emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae) is the second-tallest bird after the ostrich and the only living member of the genus Dromaius. It is native to Australia and a national symbol of that country,  featuring on that country's coat of arms alongside the kangaroo.

6 of the biggest birds in the world
Emu under the rain

As a ratite, the emu is a flightless bird, and can also run fast (up to 30 mph or 48 kmh). It thrives in forests, woodlands, and grasslands. 

It reaches a height of around 5.9 to 6.2 ft (1.8 to 1.9 m) and can weigh between 90 to 160 lbs (40 to 73 kg). 

4. Cassowary
Cassowaries are the second-heaviest birds in the world after the ostrich. 

Here, we must differentiate between the Northern cassowary (Casuarius unappendiculatus) and the Southern cassowary (Casuarius casuarius). 

The Southern cassowary is generally heavier than the Northern cassowary, and it lives primarily in Australia. Female Southern cassowaries are larger than the males. They can weigh 175 lbs (80 kgs) and stand between 4-5 ft (1.5 to 1.8 m) tall, with some birds reaching more than 6 ft (2 m). 

6 of the biggest birds in the world
Southern Cassowary

The Northern cassowary typically weighs around 128 lb (58 kg) on average and is about 5 ft (1.8 m) tall. It can be found in New Guinea.

The cassowary also holds the record as the most dangerous bird in the world, as it has very muscular, powerful legs that can deliver potentially deadly kicks. Moreover, it has three-toed feet with sharp, dagger-like claws, which it may use to slice and stab when feeling cornered or threatened.

5. Greater rhea
The greater rhea (Rhea americana) is a flightless bird from South America, a ratite that is related to the ostrich, the emu, and the cassowary. It mainly lives in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay.


Current Bird Flu Epidemic Found To Have Originated In Europe And Africa
An international team of biologists, public health specialists and infectious disease experts reports that the current near-global bird flu epidemic has its roots in Europe and Africa. In their study, published in the journal Nature, the group analyzed bird flu data from multiple animal health databases.

Going back to 2020, infectious disease experts have found a new strain of the H5N1 bird flu virus in both wild and domestic birds. Since that time, infections have spread to every place on Earth except Oceania and Antarctica. Thus far, it is the worst bird flu outbreak in Europe's history and has killed record numbers of birds in many other countries. It has also been found to jump to other animals, including humans—to date, it has killed 458 people.

Fortunately, while the virus can leap from birds to humans, it has not yet evolved the ability to jump between people. In this new effort, the research team sought to find the origins of the new outbreak by analyzing information in databases of statistics about animals, including bird deaths, around the globe.

The data came from two massive databases, one maintained by the World Organization for Animal Health and another by the United Nation's Food and Agriculture Organization. The team also obtained genetic information from several entities that have been tracking bird deaths due to bird flu from multiple sites around the world.

The researchers found that a major shift has occurred with bird flu—where once new strains almost always originated in Asia, the new variant came from Africa and Europe. They found that it was a new variant of H5N1, the strain that originated in China back in mid-1990s. Genetic analysis showed that the new version of the variant had originated in north Africa as H5N8. As it moved to Europe, it evolved to H5N1, where it become more virulent, resulting in massive bird losses. Since that time, it has spread to most of the rest of the world.

The researchers suggest that the evolutionary path of the virus represents a major shift in bird flu evolution—one that will require a new approach by officials and health experts hoping to quash the outbreak before the virus adapts to jump between humans, and before the next new strain arrives.

More information: Ruopeng Xie et al, The episodic resurgence of highly pathogenic avian influenza H5 virus, Nature (2023). DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06631-2

© 2023 Science X Network

Citation: Current bird flu epidemic found to have originated in Europe and Africa (2023, October 19) retrieved 31 October 2023 from https://phys.Org/news/2023-10-current-bird-flu-epidemic-europe.Html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

New Insights Into The Genetics Of The Common Octopus: Genome At The Chromosome Level Decoded
Octopuses are fascinating animals—and serve as important model organisms in neuroscience, cognition research and developmental biology.

To gain a deeper understanding of their biology and evolutionary history, validated data on the composition of their genome is needed, which has been lacking until now. Scientists from the University of Vienna together with an international research team have now been able to close this gap and, in a study, determined impressive figures: 2.8 billion base pairs—organized in 30 chromosomes.

What sounds so simple is the result of complex, computer-assisted genome analyses and comparisons with the genomes of other cephalopod species. The research has just been published in G3: Genes / Genomes / Genetics.

Octopuses, together with squid and cuttlefish, belong to a group of coleoid cephalopods consisting of several hundreds of species that are characterized by highly diversified lifestyles, body structure and adaptations to their environment. The study of these animals looks back on a long tradition, especially since the neuronal plasticity of the octopus brain—meaning the brain's ability to change and adapt as you learn and experience new things—provides evidence for the existence of functionally analogous structures to the brains of mammals.

This is making them a comparative model group for neurophysiological studies. Also, their ability to regenerate parts of their bodies as well as the rapid changes of their body patterns, which are important for camouflage and communication, make octopuses a popular research subject for studying how these innovative traits arose—and how they have changed—during evolution.

Closing a gap
In the research community there has been a rising need for detailed knowledge on cephalopod genomes to understand the evolution of their unique traits and their biology. An important contribution to this aim is encoding the common octopus' genome at chromosome level—an information that has not been available until now.

This has now been remedied by a research team from the University of Vienna, which—together with colleagues from the KU Leuven (Belgium), the Centro Nacional de Análisis Genómico (CNAG; Spain) and the Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn (Italy)—"supplied" the missing data and carried out extensive, molecular biological and computer-assisted studies of the octopus genome.

"With our current technologies used in genomics research, we were able to create a kind of 'genome map' for the octopus, showing how genetic information is arranged at the chromosome level," explains study first author Dalila Destanović, a scientist at the Simakov Laboratory in the Department of Neuroscience and Developmental Biology at the University of Vienna.

This reference genome, which is highly resolved at the chromosome level, will allow the scientific community to better understand the characteristics and biology of these fascinating animals on the one hand, and also to trace the evolutionary history of Octopus vulgaris on the other. Research teams can now further investigate or understand the evolutionary trajectory of coleiid cephalopods and more distantly related mollusks such as clams or snails.

2.8 billion base pairs—30 chromosomes
In fact, the researchers were able to identify 30 chromosomes in the Octopus vulgaris genome, in which 99.34% of 2.8 billion base pairs are arranged. This means that scientists now have a high-quality reference sequence that will serve as a basis for further studies on the function of genes and thus for a better understanding of biological properties of the common octopus.

The chromosomal structure of the Octopus vulgaris genome will also provide insight into the dynamic evolutionary history of these organisms by estimating chromosome rearrangement rates. Already, by comparing the Octopus vulgaris genome with the genomes of four other octopus species, the researchers have been able to show that all chromosomes exhibit numerous structural changes that have occurred during evolution by breaking off pieces of chromosomes, rearranging them and reconnecting them at the same chromosome.

"Even among closely related species, we observed numerous structural changes of the chromosomes. This finding poses questions on genome dynamics throughout their evolutionary history and opens the door to investigate how this relates to their unique traits", explains Dalila Destanović.

The dynamic evolutionary history of the octopus genome spans a period of 44 million years—and many exciting research questions are still open. The results of the current study will amount to answering some of these questions by bridging traditional Octopus vulgaris research in neurobiology, behavior and development to molecular genetic insights in these areas.

More information: Darrin Schultz, A chromosome-level reference genome for the common octopus, Octopus vulgaris (Cuvier, 1797), G3: Genes / Genomes / Genetics (2023). DOI: 10.1093/g3journal/jkad220

Citation: New insights into the genetics of the common octopus: Genome at the chromosome level decoded (2023, October 18) retrieved 31 October 2023 from https://phys.Org/news/2023-10-insights-genetics-common-octopus-genome.Html

This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.

Unraveling The Octopus’s 2.8 Billion-Base Genome
Summary: Scientists have successfully determined the genomic composition of octopuses, unveiling a whopping 2.8 billion base pairs across 30 chromosomes. This was a result of comprehensive, computer-assisted genome studies and comparisons with other cephalopod species.

This high-quality reference sequence paves the way for understanding octopus biology and tracing its evolutionary trajectory.

The findings, which shine a light on the dynamic evolutionary history of the octopus genome, will enrich research in neurobiology, behavior, and development.

Key Facts:

The Octopus vulgaris genome consists of 30 chromosomes, housing 99.34% of its 2.8 billion base pairs.
The genomic mapping reveals numerous structural changes within chromosomes, highlighting a dynamic evolutionary history spanning 44 million years.
This genome data bridges traditional octopus research in neurobiology and development to molecular genetic insights.
Source: University of Vienna

Octopuses are fascinating animals – and serve as important model organisms in neuroscience, cognition research and developmental biology. To gain a deeper understanding of their biology and evolutionary history, validated data on the composition of their genome is needed, which has been lacking until now.

Scientists from the University of Vienna together with an international research team have now been able to close this gap and, in a study, determined impressive figures: 2.8 billion base pairs – organized in 30 chromosomes.

This shows an octopus. In the research community there has been a rising need for detailed knowledge on cephalopod genomes to understand the evolution of their unique traits and their biology. Credit: Neuroscience News
What sounds so simple is the result of complex, computer-assisted genome analyses and comparisons with the genomes of other cephalopod species.

This groundbreaking research has just been published in the renowned journal G3: Genes / Genomes / Genetics.

Octopuses, together with squid and cuttlefish, belong to a group of coleoid cephalopods consisting of several hundreds of species that are characterized by highly diversified lifestyles, body structure and adaptations to their environment.
1234567890