Sherri Shepherd Invites You To Her Halloween "Renaissance" With Must-See Beyoncé Transformation
This year, Sherri Shepherd is an Alien Superstar.

That fact rang true as the Sherri host brought all the energy to her talk show set as Beyoncé for Halloween.

Not only did the comedian sport a dazzling red jumpsuit identical to the one the "Energy" singer wore during her Renaissance World Tour, but she also recreated some of Beyoncé and daughter Blue Ivy's iconic joint routine. (Yes, Sherri had her very own Blue alongside her to complete the performance).

But that's wasn't all, as Sherri had a special guest during the Oct. 31 episode that's simply irreplaceable: Beyoncé's mom Tina Knowles. And not only did the fashion designer also rock an all-red ensemble to celebrate her daughter's head-turning look, but she also reflected on the emotions she and son-in-law Jay-Z felt watching Blue take the stage alongside Bey.

"Me and her dad, we were together every night," Tina told Sherri. "He would come to the front where I was and watch that and I mean, we were both—I was in tears. And he was grinning so hard, I thought his face would hurt."


3 Reasons Why The ‘Roid Renaissance’ Is Rooted In Psychology
Despite scientific evidence that points to its negative consequences, anabolic steroid use is on the ... [+] rise. Here are the psychological reasons why so many are drawn to the substance.

getty
Everyone acknowledges the rush of adrenaline when lifting weights—but the spike from steroids is another story. What does research indicate about the psychological pull of these substances?

A 2023 report sheds light on the rising interest in steroids among fitness enthusiasts on TikTok. Videos glorifying these potentially harmful bodybuilding drugs—and in some instances directing users to sellers—have racked up an astounding 587 million views in America over a mere three-year span. What’s more concerning is that a whopping 420 million of those views came from young individuals aged 18 to 24.

Is the resurgence in the popularity of steroids due to a quest for the perfect physique? The story seems to delve deeper than surface aesthetics. Let’s explore the underlying psychological drivers in more depth.

1
When you picture a bodybuilder, images of Herculean physiques and unwavering discipline likely come to mind. However, a classic study published in the International Journal of Eating Disorders reveals another side to this world: Bodybuilders, more than their athletic peers in running and martial arts, face a heightened struggle with body dissatisfaction. This isn’t just about the chase for the elusive “perfect” body. It’s about a deep-rooted psychological tug-of-war.

Bodybuilders report significant drives for bulk and thinness, reflective of not just fitness goals but societal beauty standards and internal battles for self-worth. Unlike runners and martial artists, who might train for the sheer love of the sport or personal milestones, bodybuilders’ motivations are often twined with a complex web of self-image issues.

Add steroids into the mix, and you’ve got another layer of concern. Many bodybuilders lean towards these substances primarily in the hopes of enhancing their looks which, ultimately, boosts their self-worth.

The trend on social media to normalize steroid use in non-competitive bodybuilding underscores a powerful societal influence and a failure to recognize that body image, at its core, is a mental construct, often distorted by external pressures.

2. It’s Hard To Look Past The Immediate Positive Reinforcement And See The Long-Term Side Effects
The concept of “positive reinforcement” means that when an action produces a favorable outcome, the behavior is likely to be repeated. Steroid use can provide a burst of rapid gains, creating a powerful feedback loop: the more gains one sees, the more they’re tempted to continue or even increase the dosage. This cycle can overshadow the potential long-term damage.

A 2015 review revealed that steroids have also been linked to a physiological reward system, making its effects even more addictive and reinforcing the positive feedback loop. To make things worse, side effects like liver damage, hormonal imbalances, cardiovascular issues and mental health problems are not immediately visible, making them easier to ignore in the short-term.

3. Steroid-Using Bodybuilders Tend To Be Distrustful Of Healthcare Providers
A 2022 study published in Drug and Alcohol Dependence found that, compared to natural bodybuilders, steroid-enhanced bodybuilders show more characteristics of cluster B personality disorders, including narcissistic, borderline and antisocial personality disorder.

While we can’t ascertain if steroid users are predisposed to such characteristics or if usage leads to the development of such characteristics, there are some common attitudes and beliefs held in the steroid-enhanced bodybuilding community that discourages young people from getting sound medical advice.